---
css: "issues.css"
layout: post
title:  "Issues"
author: "Sara Tang"
date:   2015-10-12 03:39:52
permalink: "issues"
---

##How to Format Things

###If you need to deal with \text{sc}
At least in the sample, they were all under a new command called \\proc. So we got around this by removing the delimiters (the $ signs) around every instance of \\proc in the .tex file. So do this first.

###Converting with Pandoc
You need to have three files before you can begin formatting: the original input.tex, a reference reference.bib, and the csl: ieee.csl. First, run the following in the command-line:

pandoc "input.tex" -o output.html --bibliography references.bib --csl ieee.csl --mathjax

You should have an output file called output.html in the same directory. Add \<h1\>Reference\</h1\> right after \<div class="references"\> near the bottom of the html.

###That Header Stuff
Add the header stuff that Jekyll needs to the top of output.html:

\-\-\-\\
layout: post\\
title: "A Fast Single-Extractor Wait-Free Priority Queue"\\
author: "Kenneth D. Hoover and Yuanhao Wei"\\
supervisors: "Professor Faith Ellen"
date: 2015-10-02 20:44:52\\
category: "Artificial Intelligence"\\
\-\-\-

A couple of notes:

* The layout must be "post"!
* The title is whatever you want to appear on the table of contents and at the top of the page of the abstract itself
* The author(s) is stored as a string
* Supervisors must include titles ("Professor", "Doctor", etc.)
* Date is optional
* The category is one of "Artificial Intelligence", "Computational Biology", "Computational Graphics", "Human Computer Interaction", "Software Engineering", or "Software Projects". And capitalization matters!
* If, for some reason, there is a .css file included with the abstract, and the abstract looks very strange without the css formatting, you can drag that .css file into the /css/abstracts folder. Then in the header, simply add:

css: [name-of-css-file].css

###Consistency formatting
* Top-level section headings (e.g. "Introduction", "Conclusion") have \<h1\> tags
* Sub-sections have \<h3\> tags
* Acknowledgements and references have \<h4\> tags
* Tables and images are inside a \<figure\> tag, with corresponding <figcaption> tags within the \<figure\> block.
* Images are the _assets file, link them with \{\{site.baseurl\}\}/assets/IMAGE.JPG

Some issues: tables have to be encoded in html manually


###Titling the post
You should now have a .html file that is more-or-less ready to be put into _posts. Remember to name the file with the form YYYY-MM-DD-title.html or Jekyll won't recognize that this is a post...

##Fonts
I'm using Computer Modern in the abstracts, I believe it supports *italics*, <b>bold</b>, <i><b>BOTH</b></i> and whatever this is => ${\rm Roman? Semi-bold?}$ Whatever it is, it's rendered using {\rm texthere} in LaTeX.

##Finally...
Finally, you can fork the website from my repo:

<a href="https://github.com/saratang/RUCS-Web" target="_blank" >https://github.com/saratang/RUCS-Web</a>